  FINITE ELEMENT FORMULATION FOR

OUT-OF-PLANE BUCKLING OF REINFORCED

         CONCRETE WALLS




                                      106
4.1 INTRODUCTION



Concrete and reinforced concrete walls are different to elastic or steel plates because

of the complexity of the stress-strain relationships. The relationship becomes very

complex when cracking occurs due to the contribution of such factors as concrete-

steel interaction, aggregate interlock, tension stiffening, dowel affects etc.       A

number of methods can be used for the study of buckling of reinforced concrete

walls (Sanjayan et al 1995; Attard et al 1995; Attard 1994; Saheb and Desayi

1990; Aghayere and MacGregor 1988; Swartz et al 1974 etc.).             The solutions

depend on the type of loading and the boundary conditions. Among these, the three

following approaches are briefly mentioned here.



The first approach is the analytical method (Swartz et al 1974; Attard 1994). As

stated in Chapter 2 of this thesis, the analytical method is the integration of

differential equations established on the basis of the assumed buclrled shape. Swartz

and Rosebraugh (1974) and Attard (1994), as summarised in Chapter 3 of this

thesis, used an analytical approach to propose a formula for the buckling load of

simply-supported, reinforced concrete walls under in-plane uniform compression

loads. The solutions of the differential equations can be chosen from sinusoidal

functions for simply-supported conditions at all sides, and a combination of sine

functions, cosine functions and hyperbolic sine and cosines functions for other types

of boundary conditions.     In some cases, the analytical method can give what is

termed the closed form solution. The closed form solution implies a solution which

satisfies all of the boundary conditions as well as the differential equations.


                                                                                   107
However, for highly non-linear materials such as concrete and reinforced concrete,

difficulties are met when establishing the buckling equations which are capable of

modelling the full material behaviour of concrete or finding solutions which satisfy

both the differential equations and the boundary conditions.



The second approach is that of prototype or model testing (Saheb and Desayi 1990;

Swartz et al. 1974 etc.).   Model testing is a very effective tool for non-linear

mechanics, especially when the stress-strain relationship cannot be modelled

mathematically. Model testing can be used as a sample solution to check the validity

of the results from other methods. Some practical empirical design formuJae are

based on test results as reviewed in Chapter 3 of this thesis.    Experiments can

sometimes be used to modify theoretical solutions and semi-empirical formulas may

then be proposed (Swartz et al. 1974, Saheb and Desayi 1990 etc.). However,

because of the labour-intensive nature of the work and the specialised facilities

required, model testing is always a expensive method especially in the structural

engineering fie]d The other limitation is that the experiments cannot usually be

performed for all different concrete or reinforced concrete wall types with varying

loading or boundary conditions. Hence experiments are usually only performed on

specimens with the typical configurations used in design.



The third approach involves the use of numerical methods. With the advent of high-

speed, high-memory-capacity and affordable personal computers, numerical

methods such as the finite difference method, the finite element method, the finite

strip method and the finite boundary element method have been used as effective



                                                                                108
tools in structural analysis. The earliest numerical method in plate bending problems

was the finite difference method in which the differential operators              were
approximated by values at a series of discrete points inside the plate· media

(Timoshenko and Woinowsky-Krieger 1959;           Sanjayan et al. 1995).    The finite

difference method can overcome the problems of finding solutions which satisfy the

boundary conditions and differential equations for which an analytical does form

solution cannot be found. However, there is sometimes a difficulty in solving for

general boundary conditions. The finite element method is more general and can be

used for more general boundary conditions.



The finite element method was introduced in the early sixties with the term "Fmite

Element" coined by Clough ( 1960). The use of finite elements as an analytical tools

for engineers and scientists has rapidly developed in structural analysis and

engineering. It may be said that at present, the finite element technique is one of the

most effective tools for the analysis of simple and complex structures and to which

no other methods can be compared. Nowadays, many computer programs for the

analysis of structures for educational and commercial purposes have been written on

the basis of the finite element method (STRAND6 1993; ANSYS V.5 etc.).



Because of its effectiveness, the finite element method was used in this project to

find the buckling load of reinforced concrete walls under in-plane loading.       The

finite element formulation and solution for out-of-plane buckling of reinforced

concrete walls is presented in this chapter.




                                                                                   IO'J
4.2 FINITE ELEMENT MODELS FOR THE BUCKLING OF

WALLS



There is a vast amount of literature regarding finite element models for the analysis

of plates.   In this section, a brief literature review is presented on the buckling of

plates and the plate bending problem applied to reinforced concrete walls using the

finite element method. Only the rectangular element type is considered for plate

modelling because the current research project was limited to the investigation of

rectangular walls.



The 12-Degrees-of- Freedonw Rectangular Element



Kapur and Hartz (1966) showed that the finite element method couJd be used to

determine the critical buckling load for thin elastic rectangular plates.            The 12-

degrees-of-freedoms rectangular element shown in Figure 4.1 was used for a

stability analysis of plates under in-plane loading.           The assumed out-of-plane

deflection w(x,y) used was

        w(x, y) = a1 + a2 x + a3 y + 3.4 x2 + as x y + 86 y'- + a, x3 + aa x2 y + 39 x y'-

                  + a 10 y3 + au x3 y + a12 x y1                                       (4.1)

where a1 ... a12 are the unknown constant and x, y are the coordinate system as

shown in Figure 4.1. The degrees of freedom w, w.x and w3 were specified at each

node.




                                                                                             110
                                             y




                         4
                                                                    3




                                                                                X




                     1                                             2



                    Freedoms. at node are w ;    w .., and w 3




           Figure 4,1 The 12-Degrees-of-Freedom Rectangular Element




This 12-degrees-of-freedom polynomial deflection function was first proposed by

Melosh (1963). The stiffness and stability matrix were obtained using the energy

method. The lower bound for the buckling load found by using this element type

was slightly better than that obtained by Anderson et al ( 1968) who used triangular

elements. However, Carson and Newton (1969) showed that the Melosh deflection

function provides displacement continuity, but not normal slope continuity, along

inter-element boundaries.




                                                                                111
The 16-Degrees-of-Freedom Rectangular Element



Borgner et al (1966) showed that the convergence of the 12-degrees-of-freedom

rectangular element was non-monotonic.          To overcome this problem, a fourth

freedom w.xy was specified at each of the four comer nodes producing a 16-degrees-

of-freedom rectangular element.       Figure 4.2 shows the 16-degrees-of-freedom

element with a transverse out-of-plane displacement w, and two slopes w~ and w.,,

and the twist w,.,., freedom at each of the four comer nodes.              The assumed

displacement function for this element was as follows

       w(x, y) = a1 + a2 x + 83 y + a. x2 + as x y + 16 y2 + a1 x3 + aa x2 y + 89 x y2

                 + a 10 y3 + au x3 y + a12 ~ y2 + a13 x y3

                 + a u x3 y2 + a15 x 2y3 + a1, x3 y3                               (4.2)

where a1 ... a1, are unknown constants.



This displacement function provides continuity of the normal slope along edges

between elements. Carson and Newton (1969) used this element to solve for plate

buckling (elastic) under in-plane, constant and uniformly-distributed loads.             The

results obtained were better than the results found by using the 12-degrees-of-

freedom rectangular element.



Chan and Kabaila (1973) also used the 16-degrees-of-freedom rectangular element
