                             The University of New South Wales
                            SCHOOL OF CIVIL ENGINEERING


BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA SHEET                                                       ISSN 0077-880X

1. UNICIV Report No.                  2. ISBN                           3. Date September, 94



4. Title and Subtitle :
                          BUCKLING OF REINFORCED CONCRETE WALLS


5. Author (s)
                Mario M. Attard BE PhD MIE, Senior Lecturer, Department of
                Structural Engineering, UNSW


6. Keywords
                Buckling, columns; core walls, high strength concrete; reinforced
                concrete; shear walls, stability, structural analysis; structural design.


7. Abstract

An approximate buckling analysis for simply supported reinforced concrete walls under axial
compression is derived. It is assumed that the eccentricity of the axial loading is always
within the middle third of the wall thickness. Based on a stress-strain relationship for normal
to high strength concretes, a formula for the critical wall slenderness is presented. The
buckling load is then used to estimate the amplified moments in the longitudinal and
transverse directions. An upper limit on the amplification factor is determined. Formulae for
the minimum percentage reinforcement and yield moment capacity in the transverse direction
are derived. It is found that the critical direction for reinforcement is not necessarily in the
direction of loading since the moment capacity is increased due to the presence of the axial
load. An example of a core wall design is also presented.




8. Number of pages 22


                  BUCKLING OF REINFORCED CONCRETE WALLS
                                                                              Buckling of Reinforced Concrete Walls




                                          by Mario M. Attard1


1. INTRODUCTION


The majority of multistorey structures built in Australia have reinforced concrete cores. These
cores are designed to carry either the whole or part of the lateral loading (usually wind shear),
as well as the dead and live loads. The cores normally form the main structural element
through which the lifts move. Each building has its own unique core layout. Figure 1 shows
one example of a core layout. The central diaphragm walls in this layout, span horizontally
approximately 8 m. These diaphragm walls are only restrained by the intersecting walls along
their sides (there are no floors intersecting these walls). The critical slenderness of these walls
which run the total length of the building, is therefore the horizontal span to thickness ratio.
As with columns in the lower storeys, economic benefits can be gained by reducing the core
wall thickness through the use of high strength concrete. Reducing the wall thickness
however, results in walls of greater slenderness which require an assessment of the
amplification effects of buckling. The present design methods in the Australian Standard for
Concrete Structures AS3600, are very conservative and are applicable to walls which buckle
in predominantly one-way bending. The rules place a limit on the slenderness ratio of walls of
30. To take full advantage of the use of high strength concrete, a more detailed assessment of
the effects of buckling are required incorporating the two-way nature of bending in core walls.


2. DESIGN OF WALLS UNDER ONE-WAY ACTION


For walls in one-way bending (top and bottom edges simply supported and vertical edges
free), AS3600 gives the design axial strength per unit length Nu of a braced wall in
compression as


                                           b
                           Nu   0. 6 f c' t w 1. 2e 2ea   g                                             (1)




1 Senior Lecturer, Department of Structural Engineering, University of New South Wales, Australia.



                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                   Buckling of Reinforced Concrete Walls




where f’c is the compressive strength of concrete,  can be taken as 0.6, tw is the wall
thickness, e is the load eccentricity which can be taken as 0.05 tw and ea an additional
eccentricity defined as



                          e 
                          a
                              bH g     we
                                            2

                                                                                                                  (2)
                                  2500t w


with Hwe the effective height of the wall (for walls restrained against rotation at both ends
Hwe = 0.75 times the unsupported height of the wall, H). Equation 1 can be rewritten in the
form


                                b               g
                N u   0. 6 f c' t w 1. 2e  2ea
                                F
                       0. 6 f G t 1. 2  0. 05t 
                                                      2H I
                                                           J
                                                                       2


                                H                    2500t K
                                   '                                   we
                                  c     w             w                                                           (3)

                                     F L H OI
                                                                           w
                                                               2

                       0.564 f t G 1  M
                                     H N 34.3t PQ JK
                                        '             we
                                       c w
                                                           w




This is very similar to the ACI 318-1989 Code formula given by


                                           F L kH O I
                           N   0.55 f t G 1  M
                                                                       2



                                           H N 32t PQ JK
                                                 '
                              u                 c w                                                               (4)
                                                                   w




with  taken as 0.7 and k equal to 0.8 for walls braced top and bottom against lateral
translation and restrained against rotation at one or both ends. Equation 4 is empirically based
on the work of several researchers including Kripanarayanan (1977), Pillai and Parthasarathy
(1977) and, Saheb and Desayi (1990). Equation 3 is plotted in Fig. 2.


In the limit as the height to thickness ratio approaches zero, ie. no slenderness effects, the
axial load capacity is defined by 0.55 f c' Ag where Ag is the cross-sectional area of the wall.

For walls, the axial load is assumed to be applied within the middle third of the thickness (no
                                                                   tw
tension). The maximum eccentricity is therefore                        0.167t w . At this eccentricity, the axial
                                                                    6



                                                                                                                        3
                                                                   Buckling of Reinforced Concrete Walls




load capacity is approximately 0. 6 f c' Ag (see Fig. 3), agreeing with Eqn 3 when the

slenderness is zero. This eccentricity is much larger (3.34 times) than the minimum
eccentricity 0. 05t w , considered for columns.


A conservative design procedure for core walls as outlined by Mendis et al (1993), is to
calculate a fictitious ultimate stress capacity by dividing Eqn 3 by the wall thickness and
comparing this quantity to a stress calculated using factored ultimate loads and formulae for
stresses based on elastic beam theory. This procedure is extremely conservative. Figure 4
compares the AS3600 wall axial load capacity formula (Eqn 3) against available experimental
results for simply supported walls. It is seen that the AS3600 formula is extremely
conservative for walls simply supported on all four sides.


3. BUCKLING OF SIMPLY SUPPORTED REINFORCED CONCRETE WALLS


The walls making up a typical core are subjected to predominantly axial force loading, as well
as some in-plane bending and shear. The shear cores can be highly redundant and hence the
best approach for the analysis of stresses is to use computer based numerical analysis such as
the finite element technique. The central diaphragm wall of the core layout shown in Fig. 1, is
restrained along the side edges by intersecting walls which are themselves braced by floors at
each level of the building. If the diaphragm is very thin, ie approaching the slenderness limit
in AS3600 of 30 the slenderness effects will magnify any moment due to the eccentricity of
the loads and geometric imperfections present in the walls. A buckling analysis is important
as it can be used to estimate the amplification of these moments due to slenderness effects. A
finite element package for the buckling analysis of reinforced concrete walls is presently
being developed at the University of New South Wales. The first stage of this package is
complete and is currently being verified against available experimental data.


An approximate analysis for walls simply supported on all four sides loaded by uniform axial
forces per unit length Nx along two opposite sides, will be outlined here (see Fig. 5). It is
assumed here that the wall is always in compression. The procedures developed can be
applied to other boundary conditions. The aim is to estimate the buckling load of a reinforced
concrete wall and determine the amplified moments. The design axial force and amplified



                                                                                                      4
                                                                        Buckling of Reinforced Concrete Walls



moments can then be checked against the ultimate capacity of the wall section through the use
of an interaction diagram.


Consider a wall with sides b and a, as shown in Fig. 5. A rectangular axis system is defined
with the origin at the left top corner. The wall is initially considered to be perfectly straight
and in a state of equilibrium. To ascertain whether the wall is stable small out-of-plane
bending perturbations are applied. The associated equation of out-of-plane bending
equilibrium assuming an orthotropic material is


                      4 w           4 w           4 w         2 w
                Dxt         2 D               D          N                                         (5)
                      x 4      xyt
                                    x 2 2 y    yt
                                                    y 4       x
                                                                 x 2


in which w is the out-of-plane bending perturbation and Dxt and Dyt are the bending tangent
rigidities in the x and y directions , respectively, defined by


                                 E xt t w3
                          Dxt 
                                   c
                                1 2 12      h                                                        (6)


                                      t w3
                                       E yt
                          Dyt 
                                   c
                                1 2 12      h                                                        (7)



In the above Ext and Eyt are the tangent modulus of the material in the x and y directions,
respectively. The term  is the Poisson's ratio which for concrete is approximately 0.2 in the
proportional range. The variation of the dilation (Poisson's ratio) with stress is ignored here.
Dxyt is the warping tangent rigidity and can be taken as


                                        E xt E yt t w3
                          Dxyt 
                                       c1  h 12
                                              2
                                                                                                       (8)



Assuming the wall load is approximately uniform and concentric, for simply supported edges
the axial stresses will be uniform throughout the entire wall before buckling. To simplify the
present derivation, the reinforcement in the wall will be ignored. For concrete the stress-strain
relationship is nonlinear (refer to Fig. 6). As the load in the wall is increased from zero, the



                                                                                                             5
                                                                      Buckling of Reinforced Concrete Walls



tangent modulus in the axial direction x changes. The tangent modulus in the y direction
depends on the level of bending in the y direction (about the x axis) and will vary across the
width of the wall. Since there is no axial force in this direction it is likely that any bending
will cause cracking. If this moment is less than the yield moment than the tangent modulus
and the secant modulus in this direction can be set to approximately 0.4 Ec. Hence we can
write


                         E xt  Et and E yt  0. 4 Ec                                                (9)


The tangent modulus in the x direction can be obtained from the stress-strain relationship for
concrete.


Attard (1994) suggested the following equation for the stress-strain curve of concretes
applicable to strengths between 20 to 120 MPa.
                             AX  BX 2                           f       
                 Y                                  where Y       , X
                     1  ( A  2) X  ( B  1) X 2               fc      c
                                                                                                     (10)
                                                     and   X  0 0  Y  1


In the above equation, f is the stress at strain  while f c is the peak uniaxial stress at strain
 c . The strain  c is given by


                                f c' 4. 26
                         c                    Crushed Aggregates                                   (11)
                                Ec 4 f c'


while for gravel aggregates the following was proposed :


                                f c' 3. 78
                         c                    Gravel Aggregates                                    (12)
                                Ec 4 f c'


Two sets of the constants A and B are required. One for the ascending and another for the
descending portions of the curve. For the ascending curve the constants are given by




                                                                                                           6
                                                                                            Buckling of Reinforced Concrete Walls




            E 
        A  ti c                      B 
                                           b A  1g  A b1  g  1
                                                          2              2


             fc                             F f I
                                           G 1 J 
                                                      f F f I
                                                      pl
