                                                                           (6.66)

                                                                           (6.67)


It is assumed that the transfonnation matrix T z remains constant through the

thickness of the plate and equal to T or that the ang]e 8 between the principal

coordinate system and the x-y coordinate is approximately constant through the

plate thickness, from equation (6.63) we can derive


                     Elu -Eiuo]
                    [Eiu                 [-z Wm.xx]
                         -eiuo = D1 • T.     -z Wm,yy                       (6.68)
                        'Y-'Yo               -z Wm.xy




                                                                               213
                                                            t             t
                                                            2         2
Using the above equation and for the wall section         Jz dz = J z 3 dz =0 , the
                                                         --2t         t
                                                                      2
following expression can be derived:



                                                                              (6.69)


or



                                                                              (6.70)




Finite Element Equilibrium Equations



By substituting equation (6.70) into equation (6.9) we can write the equation for the

virtual work of the out-of-plane forces as


                                                                  Wm,xx]
                                                                [ Wmyy
                                                                 2w~.xy




                                                   =0                         (6.71)




                                                                                  214
If the 16-degrees-of-freedom concrete e1ement is used (see Chapter 4), and it is

assumed that

                      Wm(x,y) = aT • qcm                                        (6.72)

                                                                                (6.73)

where a is the vector of coefficients of the displacement functions (see Chapter 4),

qem is the vector of degrees-of-freedom of the element, and qeo is the vector of the

initial out-of-plane displacements of the plate element, the out-of-plane virtual work

equation is

                                                                                (6.74)

where Ke and Se are determined as in Chapter 4 and are as follows


        t3
    Ke= 12
                  J                                                             (6.75)
                  A




    Se=t         J       T
                       C-.B2.N
                               T   [Nu NNxy] B2 . c· d A  1•                    (6.76)
                  A                  yx    yy



in which Bi and B2 are defined as in Chapter 4 (equations (4.8) and (4.9)), Nu, Nyy

and Nxy = Nyx are the in-plane forces of the wall, and Ran is the element load

vector.



Assembling for the whole structure, the displacements can be found by

                                                                               (6.77)

where     K, is the structure tangential stiffness matrix which is determined by the

              tangent moduli given by the in-plane analysis;




                                                                                       215
        S is the stability matrix which is detennined by the in-plane plate forces also

         given by the in-plane analysis;

        'Im is the vector of the structure nodal unknown displacements ;

        q0 is the vector of the structure nodal initial displacement (the total

          displacement can be determined by the sum of'Im and qo);

        Ro is the structure load vector .



The in-plane analysis can be achieved by the solution of equation (6.8).            The

program RECAP developed by Foster and Gilbert (1990) was used to perform the

in-plane analysis with slight modifications.



Load Vector



Consider a node i in the finite element model, where there is a load Pi acting in

direction 1 (for example) with an eccentricity Ci (see Figure 6.5). The virtual work

done 6Wp by load Pi is then

                                                                                  (6.78)

where                                                                             (6.79)

in which u and w are the displacements at the plate middle surface at node "i" in

directions x and z, respectively.



If only out-of-plane penurbations are considered, then from equation (6.79), the

first variation of q can be written as

                                                                                     216
                                                                                    (6.80)

By substituting (6.80) into (6.78), the virtual work done by the load P. is

                                                                                    (6.81)

Hence, in the load vector for the structure Pi*Ci is assembled into · the location

corresponding to the w .x freedom at the i-th node.




          t   -------- --------------------------------- -


                                                                              W,x




                          Figure 6.5 Loading Eccentricity




Determination of the Plate Bending and Twisting Moments



By substituting equation (4.9) considering equation (6.72) for Wm into equation

(6.70) the plate bending moments and twisting moments at a point (x,y) on the

middle plate surface can be calculated by




                                                                                       217
                                                                              (6.82)


where 81 , c-1 are as determined in Chapter 4, and q_ is the vector of the nodal

displacement measured from the initial perfection state of the element to which the

point (x,y) belongs. In the current program the moments are calculated at the centre

of the element.



Solution Strategy



The step followed to arrived at a solution are:

   •   The loading is divided into the load steps;

   •   At each load step the in-plane analysis is carried out until the required load

       level is reached. The tangent moduli and the in-plane forces are then

       calculated;

   •   The element tangential stiffness matrix and the stability matrix are then

       obtained numerically through a nine point Gaussian integration;          The

       structure tangential stiffness matrix and stability matrix, as well as, the

       structure load vector are then assembled;

   •   Equation (6.77)     is solved, calculating the displacements, the full

       displacements of the nodes with initial imperfections considered;

   •   The wall moments are calculated using equation (6.82).         These are the

       amplified or second-order moments.




                                                                                 218
6.4 SUMMARY



In this chapter, the tangent moduli approximate finite eJement solution for the

analysis of reinforced concrete walls with out-of-plane initial imperfections and out-

of-plane loading eccentricities (when the second-order effect of the in-plane forces is

considered) was presented. The solution was restricted to small imperfections and

eccentricities for which the concrete stresses are assumed to be uncracked and can

be approximated by a parabolic distribution. The computer program for this analysis

was written in the FORTRAN language and it was linked to the stability analysis and

the in-plane non-linear reinforced concrete analysis program RECAP as one

MACRO command called STAB. The program is given in Appendix B. A layered

element was also derived as an exampJe of a formulation that wouJd perform a full

analysis of reinforced concrete walls under in-plane and out-of-plane loading, as well

as, out-of-plane initial imperfections and eccentricities of the wall, with both second-

order and cracking due to out-of-plane bending included. This layered formulation

is only presented for discussion and was not impJemented. Numerical exampJes

using the tangent moduli approximate formulation are given in Chapter 7 of this

thesis.




                                                                                    219
            CHAPTER 7
